---
output: fost::default_manuscript
---

# Editor 

Thank you for submitting your manuscript entitled "Clusters of fatty acids in
the serum triacylglyceride fraction associate with the disorders of type 2
diabetes" to the Journal of Lipid Research. The paper was reviewed by a member
of the Editorial Board with the assistance of two expert reviewers. I am
pleased to inform you that the manuscript will become acceptable after the
minor revisions in the attached reviews are made.

All three reviewers agreed that the paper had the strength of longitudinal
followup and would be of interest to readers of the JLR but they also noted
that there have been earlier studies with similar outcomes and one reviewer
noted that some of those papers were by the present group but were not
mentioned here. The reviewers also thought that the discussion was too
speculative and the authors need therefore, to moderate their enthusiasm. My
additional comment is that although you quote one paper by Yki-Jarvinen and
colleagues. you did not discuss/reference her more recent papers linking
shorter chain saturated fatty acids in the liver to NAFLD/NASH. You should look
at those papers and add them to the discussion. I look forward to a modified
version.

We look forward to receiving a revision that addresses the concerns of the
reviewers. In your cover letter, provide a point-by-point response to each
reviewer separately.

Please submit your revised manuscript on-line at http://submit.jlr.org as a PDF 
file only. 

*** It is important that you include the original manuscript number at the time
of resubmission. Add the original manuscript number to your cover letter and
on the Manuscript Basics submission page (in the box directly below “If you
respond Yes, please enter the previous BenchPress ID”). This ensures all
correspondence with your original manuscript will be linked to your new
resubmission. ***

TITLE AND ABSTRACT: It is important for the major findings of your study to be
intelligible to the journal’s audience. To assist you in reaching that goal,
our editorial staff will be in touch shortly to suggest revisions to your title
and abstract for you to consider. Please wait to hear from them before
submitting your revised manuscript. Please note this additional input does not
guarantee that the manuscript will be accepted by the JLR.

It is critical that you review the revised version of your manuscript with
great care before submission. If the paper is accepted, we will publish the
manuscript version as a JLR Paper in Press (PIP). It is particularly important
that the author(s) and title be entered online correctly, because this
information will become part of the paper's permanent record in Medline.

Individual source files (Word for text, TIFF or EPS for figures) will be
required if the manuscript is accepted for publication and will be submitted
directly to our printer, Dartmouth Journal Services. Specific instructions will
follow acceptance of the manuscript.

Please note that any color figures that have been submitted as part of your
manuscript to be peer reviewed by me and the reviewers will be published in
color and you are responsible for all final color fees, if your manuscript is
accepted for publication in JLR.

Note that the revised manuscript must be submitted as soon as possible,
preferably within one month, so that it can be scheduled for publication in the
next available issue of JLR.

We appreciate having the opportunity to consider the manuscript for publication
in the Journal of Lipid Research.

Sincerely,

Henry Ginsberg
Associate Editor

# Reviewer 1

COMMENTS FOR THE AUTHOR:

Johnston and colleagues report the association of triglyceride fatty acid
composition with insulin sensitivity and insulin secretion in humans. Over
several years in this predominantly female cohort, insulin sensitivity and beta
cell function decreased. The most abundant fatty acids in TGs were 16:0, 18:1
and 18:2. Several associations were noted between individual fatty acids and
metabolic variables. 14:0, 16:0, 14:1 and 16:1 clustered, were correlated
positively with each other and negatively associated with other fatty acids.

In GEE models, most of the fatty acids were negatively associated with HOMA and
ISI, but some were positively associated, notably 20:2n-6, which showed a strong
positive association with insulin sensitivity.

A partial least squares analysis confirmed the negative associations for 14:0,
14:1, 16:0, and 16:1 as well as the positive associations for 20:2, 20:5, 22:5,
and 22:6.

At least with this data set, TGFA did not appear to robustly predict beta cell
function, but 16:0 was associated with decreased and 18:1n-7 was associated with
increased function.

1. This manuscript reports interesting and potentially valuable associations
between fatty acid composition and metabolic endpoints in humans over time.

2. The associations are powerful and stand alone. The authors have no data
directly implicating de novo lipogenesis, so the last sentence in the abstract
about previous research should be removed or substantially modified.

3. There are statements in the Discussion that are overly speculative, dated,
and misleading. At the bottom of page 13 the phrase “may lead to greater DNL in
an attempt to control blood glucose” should be removed. On page 14, lines 8-9
the sentence “Higher insulin resistance may encourage greater DNL to handle the
higher blood glucose” should be removed. In the next sentence on the same page,
the authors discuss reference 47 by implying that weight loss improved fatty
acid profiles through effects on DNL, but that is facile and does not consider
the complex effects of improved insulin sensitivity on lipoprotein clearance
associated with induction of lipoprotein lipase, so this sentence needs to be
eliminated or modified.

4. While the discussion emphasizes DNL, it does not allude to how DNL can
mechanistically lead to the metabolic endpoints used in this study. It would be
helpful to indicate that DNL is complicated, and in certain tissues is involved
in the promotion of chronic inflammation leading to decreased insulin
sensitivity and other adverse metabolic events (Wei X et al. Nature 2016;
539:294-298).

5. On page 9, line 11 from the bottom, the text omits the actual r values for
the relationships between fatty acids and TG (should be in the 0.8 range for
many) and waist circumference (should be in the 0.3 range for many). More
omissions are made on lines 4 and 5 from the bottom when referring to the data
in Figure 3.

# Reviewer 2

COMMENTS FOR THE AUTHOR:

The manuscript by Johnston et al. examines the triacylglcerol (TGs) fatty acid
profiles of individuals in the PROMISE trial that was designed to examine the
changes in metabolism (insulin sensitivity and insulin secretion measures) that
predispose to type 2 diabetes in a high risk group of individuals. They report
that relative concentration of some saturated and mono-unsaturated fatty
acid-richTGs were negatively associated with insulin sensitivity while others,
including some PUFAs were associated with a positive correlation. This is a
well-done study and the association of the triglyceride pattern with various
aspects of metabolism in a well characterized cohort. Overall, paper is largely
confirmatory to previous studies that have found certain associations of lipid
species with risk of type 2 diabetes. The discussion on de novo lipogenesis is
well done and consistent with the data. 

Specific comments.

1.	It is a frustrating that this is seemingly the third in a series of papers
that is looking at patterns in lipid fractions and association with metabolic
outcomes. Thus, the TG, NEFA and phospholipid fractions all seem to be a ‘least
publishable unit. The authors must integrate the knowledge gained from the
previous analysis of NEFA and phospholipids and discuss some of the seemingly
contradictory findings from the previous studies. If the data were examined,
would the DNL story ‘hold up’?
2.	The discussion of GEE and its limitations is well done. However, it seems
that the analysis suggests that total triglycerides are predictive of HOMA2-%S
and the other parameters. Do we need to subfractionate to get insight into risk
for type 2 diabetes?
3.	Supplemental figures 2 and 3 are not discussed at all. They appear to be
interesting and informative in the development of the model. While the process
is described in the earlier NEFA paper, the authors should help the reader
understand what information is being provided without having to go back to a
previous paper.

# Reviewer 3

COMMENTS FOR THE AUTHOR:

This study examined longitudinal associations of triacylglyceride fatty acid
(TGFA) composition with both insulin sensitivity (IS) and beta-cell function in
adults at risk for T2D using data generated by the PROMISE Study. The
investigation revealed that higher proportions of a cluster of four TGFA (14:0,
16:0, 14:1n-7, 16:1n-7) strongly related with lower IS and hypertriglyceridemia.
Since previous reports had implicated these four FA as biomarkers of de novo
lipogenesis (DNL) from dietary carbohydrates, investigators concluded that
"higher DNL, likely due to greater intake of simple or refined carbohydrates,
may increase the risk of T2D through worsening of insulin sensitivity".

The strengths of the study included the longitudinal design, large cohort size
(n=477), detailed measures of OGTT obtained at 3 time points over 6 years, and
the application of sophisticated statistical modeling, including adjusted
generalized estimating equations (GEE) models and partial least squares (PLS)
regression for the analysis. The authors note that this is the first
longitudinal study to examine TGFA composition and OGTT-derived metabolic
measures. The results contribute novel clinical data to this area of study and
build upon evidence that TGFA composition can be prognostic in diabetes
progression and may have utility as a biomarker of DNL. The major drawback
of the report is that some of the mechanistic conclusions are a bit overstated.
Readers would benefit from a more balanced discussion of the study limitations
and alternative interpretations.

Major comments.

1. The authors noted that cluster of four TGFA that correlated negatively with
IS (14:0, 16:0, 14:1n-7, 16:1n-7) are products of DNL, and are therefore likely
reflecting a connection between DNL, CHO intake and diabetes risk. This
conclusion seems a bit overstated. Clearly, a link between this cluster and DNL
is possible, but the signature could be also be reflecting dietary intake,
hepatic steatosis and/or TGFA clearance by tissues such as muscle and adipose
tissue. The authors should include a more balanced discussion of potential
explanations/mechanisms beyond DNL.

2. Are there any additional analyses that can be offered to strengthen evidence
the TGFA composition is indeed a biomarker of DNL and/or CHO intake is this
specific cohort? For example, did the PROMISE study include food recall
records?

3. Also, the discussion should mention and consider that blood samples were
acquired after an overnight fast. Does fasting/fed state impact the correlation
between TGFA composition and DNL?

Minor comments.

4. The authors should comment on how results reported here combine with
(consistencies/contradictions) those reported in their recent Diabetalogia paper
(the parallel NEFA analysis).

5. Authors underscore the strength of the statistical modeling used for the
analysis, including the use DAG modeling to identify potential confounders.
Readers might benefit from a brief comment on the basic principles and strengths
of the method.
 
